---
layout: page
title: The Origins of Money by Carl Menger
---

The Origins of Money by Carl Menger is one of the great short reads in all economic literature, though the title is perhaps misleading. 
If you're looking for a historical inquirey into the various types of money that have existed in different societies through the ages, the history of coinage, state money, etc etc, you won't find it here. 

The Origins of Money is instead a theoretical introduction that explains the origins of money as a phenomena that arose in the market, prior the state action, due largely spontaneous economic human action. Anyone who wishes to understand why money developed, why particular commodities lent themselves better to becoming money than others, saleability, and how money is a social institution, not a legal one, ought to read this. Those looking for a more specific historical account of money will find this to be a valuable stepping stone to that.

## Saleability and its implications

Menger helped me understand through the concept of *saleability* that money itself is merely the most saleable good, ie, its the good that can be most easily traded for anything at any time. I don't think many people understand the implications of this so I will make it clear: if we define money as a saleable good, it means that when we are buying a good with money, we are in fact selling money for that good. To put in another way, in any trade, one party is buying a good or service, another party is buying money. Or one party is selling money and anothe party is selling a good. Fascinating! We are both buyers and sellers at any time.

This is no mere semantic parlor tick. From this understanding, we can begin to understand so much more. For example, just as price fixing and subsidies for particular commodities can lead to problems, so too can we say the same thing about money because money is merely the most saleable of all commodities, and at any time money itself has a price. It helps us understand that money is emphatically *not* a measure of value, because money itself must be valued too. From Ludgwig von Mises:

>Money is neither a yardstick of value nor of prices. Money does not measure value. Nor are prices measured in money: they are amounts of money. And, although those who describe money as a "standard of deferred payments" naively assume it to be so, as a commodity it is not stable in value. The relation between money and goods perpetually fluctuates not only on the "goods side," but on the "money side" also.

Keep in mind though we're talking about commodity money—money in its original form before state fiat money.

## Menger and Bitcoin

I read the book years ago for the first time and re-read it again to help me better understand Bitcoin. What can Menger tell us about Bitcoin? I think most timely lesson is that, because money is the most saleable commodity, and because the properties of a given commodity are what make it saleable, then Bitcoin is less useful as money to the extent to which it lacks qualities that would make it saleable.

In this regard, Bitcoin is nearly perfect, but the high on-chain fee situation means Bitcoin is both less divisible and less transportable. As Menger writes:

>The saleableness of commodities are mainly conditioned on...the degree to which goods lend themselves to transport, and the cost of transport incurred in proportion to their value.

Bitcoin, according to Menger, becomes less saleable the more expensive it becomes to use. This doesn't look good for Bitcoin's future as a medium of exchange unless things are fixed.

## Quotes (the "Gist" of Menger)

### Time and space

>With the extension of traffic in space and with the expansion over ever longer intervals of time of prevision for satisfying material needs, each individual would learn, from his own economic interests, to take good heed that he bartered his less saleable goods for those special commodities which displayed, beside the attraction of being highly saleable in the particular locality, a wide range of saleableness both in time and place. These wares would be qualified by their costliness, easy transportability, and fitness for preservation (in connection with the circumstance of their corresponding to a steady and widely distributed demand), to ensure to the possessor the power, not only “here” and “now” but as nearly as possible unlimited in space and time generally, over all other market-goods at economic prices.


### Money and law

> Money has not been generated by law. In its origin, it is a social and not a state insitution.

>It is not impossible for media of exchange,
serving as they do the commonweal in the most
emphatic sense of the word, to be instituted also
by way of legislation, like other social institutions. But this is neither the only, nor the primary
mode in which money has taken its origin. 

### Money as the solution to barter

>Consider how seldom it is
the case, that a commodity owned by somebody
is of less value in use than another commodity owned by somebody else! And for the latter just the opposite relation is the case. But how
much more seldom does it happen that these
two bodies meet! Think, indeed, of the peculiar
difficulties obstructing the immediate barter of
goods in those cases, where supply and demand
do not quantitatively coincide; where, e.g., an
indivisible commodity is to be exchanged for
a variety of goods in the possession of different person, or indeed for such commodities as
are only in demand at different times and can
be supplied only by different persons! Even
in the relatively simple and so often recurring case, where an economic unit, A, requires
a commodity possessed by B, and B requires
one possessed by C, while C wants one that is
owned by A—even here, under a rule of mere
barter, the exchange of the goods in question
would as a rule be of necessity left undone.
These difficulties would have proved absolutely insurmountable obstacles to the progress
of traffic, and at the same time to the production of goods not commanding a regular sale,
had there not lain a remedy in the very nature
of things, to wit, the different degrees of saleableness (Absatzfahigkeit) of commodities. 

>But rising civilization, and above all the division of labor and its natural consequence, the gradual formation of cities inhabited by a population devoted primarily to industry, must everywhere have had the result of simultaneously diminishing the marketability of cattle and increasing the marketability of many other commodities, especially the metals then in use. The artisan who began to trade with the farmer was seldom in a position to accept cattle as money; for a city dweller, the temporary possession of cattle necessarily involved, not only discomforts, but also considerable economic sacrifices; and the keeping and feeding of cattle imposed no significant economic sacrifice upon the farmer only as long as he had unlimited pasture and was accustomed to keep his cattle in an open field. With the progress of civilization, therefore, cattle lost to a great extent the broad range of marketability they had previously had with respect to the number of persons to whom, and with respect to the time period within which, they could be sold economically. At the same time, they receded more and more into the background relative to other goods with respect to the spatial and quantitative limits of their marketability. They ceased to be the most saleable of commodities, the economic form of money, and finally ceased to be money at all.

### Prices

>It is an error in economics, as prevalent as it is
patent, that all commodities, at a definite point
of time and in a given market, may be assumed
to stand to each other in a definite relation of
exchange, in other words, may be mutually
exchanged in definite quantities at will. It is
not true that in any given market 10 cwt. of one
article = 2 cwt. of another = 3 lbs. of a third
article, and so on. The most cursory observation
of market phenomena teaches us that it does not
lie within our power, when we have bought an
article for a certain price, to sell it again forthwith at the same price. 


### Saleability

>A commodity is more or less saleable according as we are able, with more
or less prospect of success, to dispose of it at
prices corresponding to the general economic
situation, at economic prices. 

>When any one has brought goods
not highly saleable to market, the idea uppermost
in his mind is to exchange them, not only for
such as he happens to be in need of, but, if this
cannot be effected directly, for other goods also,
which, while he did not want them himself, were
nevertheless more saleable than his own. 

>It lies in the economic interest of each trafficking individual to exchange less
saleable for more saleable commodities. 

>The saleableness of commodities are mainly conditioned on...the degree to which goods lend themselves to transport, and the cost of transport incurred in proportion to their value.

### Gold and Silver


>The
reason why the precious metals have become the
generally current medium of exchange among
here and there a nation prior to its appearance
in history, and in the sequel among all peoples
of advanced economic civilization, is because
their saleableness is far and away superior to
that of all other commodities, and at the same
time because they are found to be specially
qualified for the concomitant and subsidiary
functions of money. 

## On Print and Digital Editions

Since the book is so small, I don't think it will be available in hardcover. You can get by with printing off the free digital copy at [Mises Insitute](https://cdn.mises.org/On%20the%20Origins%20of%20Money_5.pdf) or you can buy their slim paperback edition on Amazon for a few dollars. One day I hope somebody takes the time to produce a heavily annotated and footnoted edition to further elaborate on what Menger is saying, but luckily he is very clear and there are good commentaries online at Mises Institute.
